---
layout: post
title:  "My Experience Applying for Google Engineering Residency Summer 2020"
date:   2020-07-03 15:00 -0400
categories: career
author: Richard Morrill
---

I've gotten a lot of questions about what it was like applying, and ultimately
being accepted as a Google Engineering Resident, so I figured I'd write down my
experience while I still remembered it. Google does hiring a bit differently
than most companies, and it's important to know what to expect.<!--more--> First
off, I'd better say what this post is not:

- **A Comprehensive Guide to Applying / Interviewing** I fully intend to make
  more posts on how you actually get in at Google, but right now, I'm just going
  to tell you what I experienced so you can have a better idea what to expect. A
  lot of this post will be useful for actually getting hired, but you'll have to
  apply some critical thinking to decided if my methods will work out for you.
- **A COVID Story** The events I'm going to cover here all happened before
  anybody had even heard of COVID-19.  I'm going to write about how the virus
  affected my experience once I've settled in at Google.
- **A Guide to Whether or not You Should Apply** Chances are, if you're computer
  science student, you do want to work at Google, so the only reason you
  wouldn't want to apply is because you're afraid of rejection.  Just go ahead
  and submit your resume and transcript, you won't lose anything by getting
  rejected!  If you're torn between going the residency route, or trying to
  simply get in as a regular software engineer, I can't really help much, since
  I only have experience applying for the residency program.
- **A Source of Interview Questions** I'm not sure how much I can get away with
  sharing specific interview questions, given that it's unlikely any
  interviewers are still using the questions I got, but I'm not taking any
  chances just yet.  I'll provide a basic rundown of the skills they tested, but
  no specific questions.  Please don't email me about this, if I'm going to
  share any information which I'd previously agreed not to, I will do it
  publicly when doing so will not negatively affect Google's hiring process.

Mainly, this post is going to be an account of my actual experiences, with
minimal commentary.  I'll go into more depth about specific parts of my
application process in future post, but for now, I'm just sharing what I think
was a fairly average student's process getting into Google.  I applied in fall
2019, and eventually was given a start date in late July 2020, so if it's been
more than a few years since then, not all of the info here will be fully
relevant. I'm going to break up this post roughly chronologically, and you might
find you benefit most from this posts if you bookmark it and come back to later
sections as they're more relevant to your own experiences.

How to Apply
------------

Just to get this out of the way to avoid responding to too many emails, [Apply
Here](https://www.google.com/about/careers/students/engres.html) (button at
bottom of page).  They discourage a cover letter pretty explicitly on their
form, and I can tell you I've heard from multiple sources, this advice is not
some sort of trick.  They will read your cover letter if your resume otherwise
meets their standards, but it really won't do you many favors.

Education & Preparation
-----------------------

At the time of my application, I had what I'd call a fair amount of computer
science classes, practical experience, and interview prep under my belt.  I was,
as you might have guessed, in the first semester of my senior year.  I'd taken
CS 1 & 2, Algorithms, Discrete Structures, data Structures, and a few other CS
classes, but no high-level theoretical classes yet.  Compared to students from
more rigorous CS programs, my transcript likely appeared light, but for Fordham
University, I was on par in my major, and had taken a large number of
semi-relevant elective classes, such as Calculus 1-4, Linear Algebra, and Macro-
and Microeconomics.

For the summers after my Freshman and Sophomore years, I worked with
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement (potential story about that time
coming in a later post), and only used my programming skills to automate my
Excel- and Access-based tasks.  Of course, that didn't stop me playing up the
importance of the scripts I created for my colleagues on my resume.  The summer
after my Junior year, I had a great internship with Volofin Capital Management,
where I took on a very large number of different responsibilities, and learned a
huge number of new skills (story coming soon).  My first two summers probably
didn't stand out much, but my third one most likely was a deciding factor in
securing an interview.

Like most CS students, I told myself I was going to do a LOT more interview prep
than I actually ended up doing.  I went to student-run interview prep classes,
lugged around a copy of _Cracking the Coding Interview_, and spent hours on
Leetcode.  I only did half as many problems as I'd planned on, but I got the
basics of every major category of interview question down.  Graphs and dynamic
programming are the categories that stump candidates most often, and the areas
that low-level CS classes do the least to prepare students for, so I gave them
the most attention.  I was well-prepared, but not overly so.  Being able to
solve problems is important, but having the background knowledge to answer
follow-up questions and appear knowledgeable in the interview is how you really
make your mark.

Application
-----------

Although my former supervisor had offered to speak with a friend of his
currently working at Google, and potentially get my resume into the stack
without going through the online hiring process, I'd forgotten about his offer
before I applied online through the normal channel.  I'm not totally sure how
big of a difference this would have made, but my advice would be to take every
bit of help you are offered, provided there are no strings attached if you
actually remember to do so.  I did not write a cover letter, and simply uploaded
PDFs of my resume and transcript as instructed.

I cannot access my application any more, so I'm not sure exactly which version
of my resume Google got, but [Version
14](/assets/downloads/Resume-v14.pdf){:target="_blank"} was my general-purpose
resume at the time.  I'll cover the finer points of resume design (many of which
this version actually gets wrong) in a future post, but here's a few things you
might want to copy:

- **Version Numbers** This really helps to keep things straight when your resume
  is constantly-evolving.  The last thing you want is to remove a section,
  change your mind, and have no way of getting it back.  Also, if you just have
  one Word file called "Resume.docx" which is constantly updated, and save it as
  "Resume.pdf" before sending it out every time, you could accidentally send an
  old pdf version if you don't overwrite the old file every time.
- **PDF Format** You've probably been told this hundreds of times, but I'll say
  it again: _ALWAYS SUBMIT RESUMES AS PDF_ There are a myriad of reasons for
  this, but first and foremost, you don't want to risk a recruiter opening a
  Word file in Google Docs or LibreOffice and seeing messed up formatting.
  They'll know it isn't you fault, but it will still make you look bad.  Word is
  standard enough that you can probably get away with it, but since PDF is the
  dominant standard, you might look a little unprofessional.
- **Bolded Skills in Experience Section** I chose to skip the skills list, and
  simply included my skills in with my experience.  It is debatable whether that
  list of programming languages often seen at the top of resumes actually does
  anything, but even if you choose to include it, you want to make it abundantly
  clear which experience corresponds to which skills.  Saying you "know C++"
  says nothing, but saying that you took two classes with it, then used it all
  summer in an internship says everything your recruiter needs to know.

Interviews
----------

I really was expecting a much fancier interview from Google than I actually got.
The crazy questions and silly competitions have either been phased out, or
simply were myths to begin with.  All I got were two rounds, each consisting of
two back-to-back phone interviews (roughly 45min) that asked me to write code in
a Google Doc.  Overall, none of the questions were particularly hard, but they
did cover a fairly wide variety of topics, so don't think you can get off easy
on interview prep by studying specifically for the Google interview.

Google will interview you in pretty much any language you ask them to.  My best
language is C#, so I requested that for my first round.  In my second round,
there was a misunderstanding, so I actually had to interview in C++, which,
fortunately, I know nearly as well as C#.  After both of my interview rounds, I
was informed that while Google will attempt to interview candidates in their
preferred language, it is best to choose a language that is widely used within
Google, so that more interviewers will be available.  If you choose a language
known by few Googlers, you may find yourself being interviewed by a software
engineer who rarely conducts interviews, and may not be happy about being forced
to interview you.  C++, Java, and Python are by far the best languages to
choose.  Among those three, there won't be any significant difference in the
difficulty of your interview, or the availability of an interviewer, so just
pick the one you use most often.

One of the questions I was given I had actually practiced just days before, and
could solve without any real effort.  As I'd been advised to do numerous times,
I let my interviewer know that I had already seen the question, and he told me
to simply tell him the solution, and then we moved on to a fresh question.  The
last thing you want to do is to pretend to solve a problem during an interview
to which you already know the solution.  Experienced interviewers have little
difficulty spotting this, and they will not be impressed.

I had a total of 4 interviews, and in two of them, I finished the problems I was
given quite quickly.  For the rest of the allotted time, my interviewers asked
me to suggest ways in which the solution I gave could be scaled. I did not
actually have to modify my code for this, so a theoretical understanding of how
multithreaded code and distributed computing systems are written is sufficient.
That said, I did know how the basics of multithreading in both C++ and C#, and I
believe that briefly mentioning how I could specifically modify my code to run
in parallel helped my case.

Leading up to my interviews, I'd received conflicting advice on the importance
of establishing a rapport with my interviewer.  Some people had told me that
being friendly, and using some light humor was key to getting hired, and others
advised me that it was best to remember that interviewers are not your friends,
and to keep every interaction strictly professional.  In my interviews, I let my
interviewer set the mood.  Some of my interviewers seemed determined to keep
things light, and cracked a few jokes with them, which they seemed to
appreciate.  Others launched directly into the technical questions, and in those
interviews I did not make any attempts at humor.

At the end of each of the phases of my interview process, I truly had no idea
how I had performed.  On one hand, I did manage to solve every problem I was
given, but on the other, I'd been told numerous time that your ability to solve
problems is not nearly as important as  how you behave while solving them, and
how you describe your own solution afterward.  On one problem in particular, I
worried that I had ruined my chances of getting hired, as my interviewer did not
seem to be able to understand my solution, as I had solved it using a rather
unorthodox method.  I'll never know if she recommended I be hired or not.  All
you can do post-interview is be patient, and remember that one bad interview can
be balanced out by three successful ones.

Offer
-----

Roughly 10 days after my final interview, I was told that I had "passed," but
that my offer was "pending executive approval."  A few days later, I got my
offer, and I was more than impressed with the offered pay.  At that time, I was
fairly certain I was going to take Google's offer, but a capital management
company had already scheduled me a trip to Chicago to interview with them the
following week, so I asked for more time to consider my offer. I was granted
just enough time for the other company to turn around an offer after my
interview.

The Chicago interview ended up being by far the hardest I had ever been given,
and I immediately accepted Google's offer after, knowing that I would not
receive one from the capital management firm.  Interestingly enough, the Chicago
firm actually then asked me to take a follow-up online exam.  I'm assuming this
is because I actually passed their interview (which was ridiculously hard for
new graduates), but since I had told them the salary Google had offered, which
was significantly higher than is common in the financial industry, they wanted
to see if I was enough of a stand-out to be worth breaking the bank.  I solved
all the problems on the online exam, but hardly gave ideal solutions, and
received a polite rejection email the next day.

Conclusions
-----------

Google's hiring process is very balanced.  While there is a lot you can do to
improve your chances, at the end of the day, either you are what they are
looking for or you aren't, and there is no shortcut to convince them to hire
you.  This isn't to say that if you get rejected, you can't grow into a better
candidate, but just that you need to focus on growing your abilities as a whole,
not just studying for the interview.  Google's questions aren't nearly as hard
as you might expect them to be, but the standards by which they judge your
interview performance are rigorous.  If solving extremely hard problems is all
you are good at, chances are you will have an easier time getting hired
somewhere else.  However, if you have well-rounded skills, you'll find getting
hired at Google isn't actually as hard as you think it is.